Abstract {#abstract .unnumbered}
========

Multi-objective decision-making is critical for everyday tasks and
engineering problems. Finding the perfect trade-off to maximize all the
solution’s criteria requires a considerable amount of experience or the
availability of a significant number of resources. This makes these
decisions difficult to achieve for expensive problems such as
engineering. Most of the time, to solve such expensive problems, we are
limited by time, resources, and available expertise. Therefore, it is
desirable to simplify or approximate the problem when possible before
solving it. The state-of-the-art approach for simplification is
model-based or surrogate-based optimization. These approaches use
approximation models of the real problem, which are cheaper to evaluate.
These models, in essence, are simplified hypotheses of cause-effect
relationships, and they replace high estimates with cheap
approximations. In this thesis, we investigate surrogate models as
wrappers for the real problem and apply to find Pareto optimal
decisions.

The core idea of surrogate models is the combination and stacking of
several models that each describe an independent objective. When
combined, these independent models describe the multi-objective space
and optimize this space as a single surrogate hypothesis - the surrogate
compositional model. The combination of multiple models gives the
potential to approximate more complicated problems and stacking of valid
surrogate hypotheses speeds-up convergence. Consequently, a better
result is obtained at lower costs. We combine several possible surrogate
variants and use those that pass validation. After recombination of
valid single objective surrogates to a multi-objective surrogate
hypothesis, several instances of s provide several Pareto front
approximations. The modular structure of implementation allows us to
avoid a static sampling plan and use self-adaptable models in a
customizable portfolio. In numerous case studies, our methodology finds
comparable solutions to standard NSGA2 using considerably fewer
evaluations. We recommend the present approach for parameter tuning of
expensive black-box functions.
