Concept
=======

##### Into

1.  Classification approaches with surrogate model

2.  Define problems that related with surrogates model

3.  Ideas on how to solve it

4.  Discussion

In this section general applicability of surrogate model presented. With
different applicability use cases, there are some obstacles occurred
that have a place to be in all circumstances.

General problem trade-off is producing the best possible multi-objective
solution with less effort. Because we consider expensive to the
evaluation system, an effort first of all means really evaluated
examples. Each of this evaluation can require a lot of time, energy or
other resources. That is why the main comparison criteria for approach
in solving the multi-objective problem is reducing the count of
experiments. Moving further is a question: What does it mean, solving a
multi-obj problem?

-   Single-point, that is Pareto optimal solution

-   Multi-point solutions that all is Pareto optimal

In this work under solving a multi-objective problem, we intend to find
a set of none-dominated points that cover a wide range of objectives
values and close to true Pareto front as possible. For reach, this goal
multiple algorithms could be applied but MOEA is favoured choice. The
advantage of evolutionary algorithms is that it could be easily
modified. It operate on a set of solution candidates, that are
well-fitted to approximate Pareto-front. Finally, it has been
demonstrated in various usecases that evolutionary algorithms can
estimate highly complex problems. With constrains as expensive
evaluations, the real count of experiments could be reduced throw
applying a multi-objective algorithm on a surrogate model. This
technique is the preferred choice for functional optimization when the
evaluation cost is large.

As shown before for a black-box expensive problem suited surrogate or
model-based optimization. But this approach also has open questions and
limitations:

-   Multi-objectivity. They are not too many surrogate models that can
    handle multi-dimensional objective space. Also scaling existing
    multi-output surrogate model is an open research question

-   Surrogate is domain-specific. For improving and reach the best of
    the best prediction we should know in cross-grain basic objective
    surface to apply certain surrogate. Universal surrogates can gain
    optimal results but not the best possible

-   Quality of prediction depends on how much samples do we have for a
    specific type of surrogate. There is additionally trade-off between
    reducing samples size and maximize the quality of prediction.

-   Categorical features. A lot of real-world problems depends on the
    categorical feature. Parameter tuning with that type of space is not
    trivial

-   Often Optimization algorithm and surrogate model are very tightly
    coupled. Highly united implementation can reduce the search
    possibility of algorithm and suitable for a specific type of
    problem. Reimplementing these algorithms for each usage scenario
    becomes timeconsuming and error-prone.

Mainly two groups are affected by this problem:

-   Application engineers who need to choose, implement, and apply
    state-of-the-art algorithms without in-depth programming knowledge
    and expertise in the optimization domain

-   Developers of optimization methods who want to evaluate algorithms
    on different test problems and compare a variety of competing
    methods

For slow computational problems, it would be useful to modulate a
problem using a quite small number of most informative examples. This
general topic introduces compositional surrogate, as a proxy model that
approximate objectives surfaces and support MOEA to evaluates near a
multi-objective solution and predict better multi-objective samples on
each iteration.

There is a clear need for a method to provide and distribute
ready-to-use implementations of optimization methods and ready-to-use
benchmark and real-world problems. These modules should be freely
combinable. Since the above- mentioned issues are not constrained to
evolutionary optimization a candidate surrogates solution should be
applicable to a broader range of search algorithms.

The main objective of this part is to provide a thorough treatment of
multi-objective parameter tuning with evolutionary algorithm(s)

Key description how to improve solutions for problems in research
questions.

Multi-objective optimizations are frequently encountered in engineering
practices. The solution techniques and parametric selections however are
usually problem-specific. [@raw:abs181207958]

Compositional Surrogate Model
-----------------------------

The potential for applying surrogate is laid in the fast evaluation of
the surrogate model. This advantage should outperform disadvantage in
time required to build this surrogate model. In classical model-based
optimization is used single surrogate-model that provide a hypothesis on
the relation between parameter and objective space. There is a lot type
of models that can do it but out and away fewer models that can manage
multidimensionality objective space. The perspective way to create
multi-objective surrogate is stacking multiple simple models into one
that describes complex objective space. Notwithstanding that those
models could be completely different and build in parallel, they still
related because fitted on intersection features. Splitting optimization
problem to multiple stages improves the reusability of code and makes
approach scalable. Nevertheless, we can switch from single-obj to multi
obj and change optimization technic on the fly.

A surrogate model is either selected randomly or due to its popularity
in the area with which the problem is associated. However, there are
still some open challenges related to the ensemble of meta- models such
as what should be the criterion for choosing different metamodels or how
different metamodels can be used simultaneously? In addition, there are
no guidelines for using different models for different objective
functions [@raw:SoftSurvey].

Domain-specific problem
-----------------------

With gain to find the best solution with less effort surrogate models is
domain-specific. It’s mean that from two surrogate models in two
different problems the best surrogate is changing. It could interpreter
as Non-free lunch theorem in model-based optimization. If we extend this
argument then the same optimization problem in different parameter
tuning iteration could be interpreted as another optimization problem.
This means that to reduce effort and increase the convergence of an
algorithm we should change the surrogate model depend on how much
samples do we have. As one would expect, no approximation method is
universal. This leads us to use a portfolio with surrogate models. As a
negative consequence, the model fitting additional introduces an
additional overhead into the optimization.

Surrogate Validation
--------------------

It is necessary to sacrifice a small portion of the data experiments to
check the quality of the surrogate model on it. Based on validation
results we can discard inadequate models and in a complex manner
evaluated quality of solutions from valid models. If neither model is
valid, this means that the best solution right now is a random solution.
This may be due to insufficiently count of samples for the model or
incorrect surrogate model, which is unable to describe the hypothesis
between the configuration and objective space. In the context of
parameter tuning a common misconception is that we are interested in the
accuracy of the model not in the entire space but in the optimal region.
That is why evaluation surrogate validity based only on the coefficient
of determination(R2) metrics is incorrect. Global R2 can be anyway used
as a threshold in which if the models score becomes smaller of some
threshold value it is not valid even without further estimations.

Real parameters for optimization
--------------------------------

Parameter tuning is not a trivial task. Coding features for a surrogate
model can transform es in mining full form, understandable for a
surrogate model. Encoding just represents a feature in another form that
help model instanciation relation and a correlation between features.
Based on this inner interpretation model can predict the values of
labels based on a parameter vector. The problem occurs what we use the
model as black-box to find a minimum of prediction and make reverse
interpretation of this optimal predictions in the context of parameter
space. Offen this prediction is not a feasible point from parameters
space. As a possible solution, it partly transforms problem in multiple
classification tasks and then considers there relation as a continuous
problem for optimization \[TPE\]. For general surrogate model with mixed
parameters, we can solve problem orthogonally with multiple optimizers.
All categorical feature are encoded and with other numerical parameters
were fitted to the surrogate model. Then we use this model as a source
that describes the function of the mapping parameter to objective space.
We incrementally solve this optimization problem on a subset of
dimension iteratively. For example, we find optimal parameters in
categorical dimensions and then fix these values and optimize surrogate
on the left sub set of numerical dimensions where categories are fixed.

Discussion
----------

##### 

[Infill criteria]{} In the case of MOEA, solution of algorithm present
as non-dominated final population. Based on unbiased, multi-objective
criteria, they all uniformly could be presented as a prediction to the
next evaluation. They represents current solution based on the surrogate
model. Nevertheless, there is prior knowledge available in samples which
can be taken into account. To reduce the number of candidates in the
population, it is possible to deny those in which the distance to the
nearest available sample is less than their average distance. So there
are two strategies for predicting from a population:

-   Prior and posterior knowledge. Based on changing metrics in
    available and proposed solutions

-   Posterior knowledge. Proposed solutions are all equal

Also, to the best of our knowledge, has not been previously or stingy
reported in the efficient multi-objective optimization. Contribution:

-   Surrogate combination/composition. Current approaches use the same
    model for each dimensionality

-   Surrogate portfolio. Search a better hypothesis for a specific
    problem at a particular stage of parameter tuning

-   Metric combination for evaluation Pareto optimal points

-   Samples size depends on model(s) validity

-   Combination of different(orthogonal) solvers

Some of the major findings were [@raw:SoftSurvey]:

1.  Kriging and neural networks were the most commonly used surrogate
    models

2.  Most of the algorithms were based on dominance-based evolutionary
    algorithms

3.  Most of the algorithms solved the problems with no more than three
    objectives

4.  The number of decision variables was also limited especially when
    using Kriging

5.  Only few algorithms used an ensemble of metamodels

6.  Many algorithms were tested only on benchmark problems which were
    not at all computationally expensive
