Evaluation. Experimental Results
================================

Will be used two types of problems: Synthetic and Real physical

Idea: Generate problem from data set and try to optimize it with
parameter tunning from the beginning. Need models with accuracy  96 amd
multiply objectives.

Test suite: ZDT
---------------

This widespread test suite was conceived for two-objective problems and
takes its name from its authors Zitzler, Deb and Thiele.
Ref\["Comparison of multiobjective evolutionary algorithms: Empirical
results.", 2000\]

Test suite: DTLZ
----------------

This widespread test suite was conceived for multiobjective problems
with scalable fitness dimensions and takes its name from its authors
Deb, Thiele, Laumanns and Zitzler. Ref\[\"Scalable Test Problems for
Evolutionary Multiobjective Optimization\", 2005\]

Test suite: WFG
---------------

This test suite was conceived to exceed the functionalities of
previously implemented test suites. In particular, non-separable
problems, deceptive problems, truly degenerative problems and mixed
shape Pareto front problems are thoroughly covered, as well as scalable
problems in both the number of objectives and variables. Also, problems
with dependencies between position and distance related parameters are
covered.

1.  A few unimodal test problems should be present in the test suite.
    Various Pareto optimal geometries and bias conditions should define
    these problems, in order to test how the convergence velocity is
    influenced by these aspects.

2.  The following three Pareto optimal geometries should be present in
    the test suite: degenerate Pareto optimal fronts, disconnected
    Pareto optimal fronts and disconnected Pareto optimal sets.

3.  Many problems should be multimodal, and a few deceptive problems
    should also be covered.

4.  The majority of test problems should be non-separable.

5.  Both non-separable and multimodal problems should also be addressed.

Ref\[ "A Review of Multi-Objective Test Problems and a Scalable Test
Problem Toolkit", 2006\]

Problem Suite: CEC 2009
-----------------------

Competition on "Performance Assessment of Constrained / Bound
Constrained Multi-Objective Optimization Algorithms". All problems are
continuous, multi objective problems.

Physical. Real world problem
----------------------------

Computational models describing the behavior of complex physical systems
are often used in the engineering design field to identify better or
optimal solutions with respect to previously defined performance
criteria. Multi-objective optimization problems arise and the set of
optimal compromise solutions (Pareto front) has to be identified by an
effective and complete search procedure in order to let the decision
maker, the designer, to carry out the best choice.

### Materials Selection in mechanical design

### Test generation

### Gold or oil search. Geodesy

### Space crafts

Problem 1: obtain a set of geometric design parameters to get minimum
heat pipe mass and the maximum thermal conductance. Thus, a set of
geometric design parameters lead to minimum pressure total cost and
maximum pressure vessel volume. The alternative solutions are very
difficult to be adopted to practical engineering decision directly.
Ref\[Multi-Objective Optimization Problems in Engineering Design Using
Genetic Algorithm Case Solution\] Problem 2: Solar sailing mission
design
