Conclusion
==========

In this thesis, we propose a strategy for dynamic composition of
surrogate models which allows the use of a surrogate portfolio for
tuning black-box functions. Our investigation revealed that current
surrogate-based optimization operates with a single type of model or the
static combination of several varieties. This type of approach lacks
variability and cannot be adapted for arbitrary problems. Our research
goal was to decompose model-based multi-objective optimization into
reusable and comparable components. To achieve this goal we make
following research contributions:

1.  First, we developed a compositional model for an arbitrary type of
    surrogate model. We established and implemented a component that
    combined several models into one surrogate hypothesis \[**RG1**\].
    Nevertheless, for an arbitrary, unknown problem, we still require
    dynamic integration of surrogates into a composite model.

2.  Second, we adapted the cross-validation technique to validate and
    compare surrogate models. A multi-step validation is essential to
    avoid the model underfeed and overfeed. Validation information
    enables us to dynamically decide on picking the right models or use
    the sampling plan as a default variant \[**RG3**\].

3.  Third, we implemented a surrogate portfolio that combines the
    functionality from the preceding paragraphs. The portfolio allows
    the dynamic selection and combination of multiple surrogate models
    that are concerned with a concrete problem. This property means that
    a portfolio can offer more than one surrogate hypothesis for
    optimization \[**RG2**\].

4.  Fourth, we improved the variability and extensibility not only of
    surrogate models but also of optimization algorithms. This
    improvement creates the possibility to combine solutions into a
    stack to reduce overall error.

In sum, these contributions enabled us to achieve results comparable to
the state-of-the-art NSGA2 optimization algorithm in a wide range of
optimization tasks. For almost all problems, our approach has
demonstrated a significant advantage over all solution criteria.
Analysis of the parameters showed that the most significant influence on
results was made by solution combination (assumptions about the Pareto
front). We have implemented a dynamic sampling plan that selects
additional random points if there is no valid model. This strategy
improved exploration-exploitation balance, which is determined for each
optimization problem independently, and that led to the overall
improvements in the results. The next crucial issue that we addressed is
the optimization of multidimensional space. We have shown that a
surrogate model can be applied to a small number of objectives but can
be inappropriate if the objectives are multiplied. The optimal solution
for this issue is a flexible combination of better models at each
optimization iteration.

We consider that the results accomplished in this thesis can be useful
for improving parameter tuning and for overall model-based optimization.

Future Work 
===========

In this thesis we have developed the strategy that has a component
structure and a unified interface. All major components are easily
replaceable and scalable. A strong feature of our solution is the
adaptation of optimization to a scaled unknown problem. That is why
further integration with the *software product line* is a promising
improvement. The right solution for this is - a software product line
for parameter tuning. It has the necessary key features such as stop
condition, noisy experiments and distributed architecture. The
integration of this thesis into BRISE will improve its variability and
scalability.

There are other several directions that we aim to focus on in the
future.

-   Promising results have been obtained for the combination of
    optimization techniques with surrogate modes. Further investigation
    in extensive parallel combination of *surrogate models and
    optimization algorithms* could significantly improve optimization
    results.

-   It is advisable to change the composition of the portfolio to
    discard those models that are performing poorly. This *dynamic model
    collection* for the surrogate portfolio could improve the
    exploration of new models and reduce time costs.
